1.Standard organizations
	IEEE 802.11
	IETF
	Wi-Fi Alliance

2.802.11
	802.11
	802.11a
	802.11b
	802.11g
	802.11n MIMO
	802.11ac
3.Radio Frequency
4.Wireless Signal Characteristic
	wavelength
	frequency
	amplitude
	phase   if the peaks are in exact alignment, the signals are in phase
		Two signals in phase result in a much greater amplitude
5.measuring wireless power
	coverage
	performance
the difference of power:
	decibels
	pc1 received 10mW, PC2 recieved 1mW, them the difference would be 10dB
6.The 802.11 standard defines 4 wireless topologies
	BSS basic service set, one AP
	ESS extended service set, the Distribution System Medium connects two or more APs
	IBSS independent, no AP, peer to peer, also called ad-hoc network
	MBSS mesh
7.RF behaviors
	absorption
	reflection
	scattering
	refraction (signal bent as it passes the medium)
	diffraction (the bending of a signal around an object) 
	attenuation (decrease of amplitude)
	free space path loss (loss of signal strength due to the broadening)
	multipath (result of two or more paths of a signal arriving at a reciever)
	gain (amplification)
8.RF gain
	0dB == equal
	3dB == twice
	10dB == ten times
	-3dB == half
9.EIRP effective isotropic radiated power
	actual power level that is radiated from the antenna
10.beamwidth
	based on the point where the signal reaches half power
11. band, frequency, channel
	a band is a group of frequencies
	overlapping channels will cause interference
12.narrowband --utilizes a narrowband of frequencies, such as AM/FM radio
	not suited for wireless networking
spread spectrum	
	uses more frequencies
	transmits redundant data
13.FHSS frequency hopping spread spectrum
	hops to other frequencies
DSSS direct sequence spread spectrum
	spread across the range of frequencies
OFDM orthogonal frequency division
	the data is divided among narrow band channels (called multiplexing)
14.wireless networking can be accomplished by transmitting radio frequencies over two spectrum bands:(unlicensed, no restricts on use)
	(but controlled. max transmitter power 1w, max EIRP 4w)
	2.4 GHz
	5.0 GHz
	more and more devices can operate on either
15. 2.4GHz
	crowded  microwaves,cordless phones,bluetooth,etc
	ISM band, industrial,scientific, medical
	the longer wavelengths of 2.4GHz penetrate obstructions better than the shorter 5.0GHz wavelengths
	most wireless networking devices use 2.4GHz
	13 overlapping channels
	3 non-overlapping channels: 1,6,11,  throughputs drop when interference happens
	used by 802.11b,g,n (n used either)
16. 5 GHz
	faster data transfer rate
	but less range
	much less interference
	divided into 4 sub-bands: U-NII-1, 2, 2e,3
	each U-NII band is divided into channels
	there are 23 non-overlapping channels!
	802.11ac groups channels to provide higher bandwidths
	channels 52-140 may interfere with radar system. since the radar has higher priority, is will cut down the transfer rate
17.bandwidth vs throughput
	bandwidth: the maximum
	throughput: the actual
18.antenna
	antenna strength is measured as a reference to an isotropic radiator, using dBi
	antenna strength can also be measured as a reference to another antenna, using dBd
	A standard dipole antenna has a dBd of 0 and a dBi of 2.14. if a measured antenna has a dBd of 3, then it has a dBi of 3+2.14
	2 ways to increase the power output of an antenna
		active gain: generate more power at the transmitter
		passive gain: direct or focus the RF signal
19. antenna types
	omnidirectional
		increasing power will increase the horizontal signal but decrease the vertical signal
	directional
		semi-directional: short to medium distance
		highly directional: long distance
20. reading polar charts (azimuth and elevation charts)
	the outer ring represents the strongest signal strength that was measured
	shows the relative signal strength in each direction, compared to the strongest
21. highly directional antennas (used for point-to-point communications over large distances)
	parabolic
	grid
	(high gain, narrow beamwidth)
22.semi-directional
	sector antenna
	especially useful in an antenna array to provide omnidirectional coverage over a long distance
23.line of sight
	visual line of sight(straight line)
	RF line of sight (an additional area around the VLOS, called fresnel zones)
	obstructions in the Fresnel zones will affect signal transmission
24.antenna diversity
	uses more than one antennas
25.MIMO multiple-input, multiple-output
	uses multiple antennas simultaneously to increase data transfer speed
	802.11ac uses it
26. attenuators
	fixed-loss  provides a set amount of dB loss
	variable-loss  can be adjusted to different amount
27.VSWR  voltage standing wave ratio
	a measurement of the change in impedances to an AC signal
	if there are impedance variations between devices, VSWR occurs
	usually occurs between the transmitter, cable, and antenna
	represented as a numerical relationship
	1.5:1  means radiated power is 96%
	2:1  89%
	6:1  50%, lost 3dB
	VSWR can be minimized by making sure that the impedance of all wireless networking equipment is matched
28. three main considerations when installing an antenna
	VSWR
	signal loss, due to inferior or improperly installed components
	antenna mounting: proper placement. increasing signal power will change the radiation pattern
29.communication methods
	simplex communication: device can only transmit or receive. (AM/FM radio)
	half-duplex: both devices have the ability to transmit and receive, but only one device can transmit at a time. (Walkie-talkies)  802.11 wireless network currently uses this.
	dull-duplex: both devices can transmit and receive at the same time (telephone) 
30. access point vs hotspot
	a WAP estabilshes a coverage area for wireless connectivity
	a hotspot is the coverage area created by a WAP
31. ssid,  service set identifier
	ssid cloaking by not broadcasting it is damn weak
32. bss and bssid
	bssid is the AP's MAC address
33. ess
	seamless roaming: coverage areas overlap
	nomadic roaming: coverage areas seperate
	colocation: provides increased client capacity by overlaping a lot
34. IBSS
	each client station must have the same SSID WLAN name
	each client station transmits frames directly to one another
	half-duplex
25. MBSS
	used to provide wireless distribution of network traffic, not just direct traffic to wired network
	the mesh points function very similar to routers in wired network
26. access point modes (not all the APs provides all the modes)
	root/AP/access mode: the most common mode
	bridge mode: operates as a wireless bridge to connect two wired network
	workgroup bridge mode: this AP is a client to another AP and provides a network connection for the equipment connected to its Ethernet port 
	repeater mode: the AP acts as a repeater to extend the coverage of another AP on the same channel
	mesh mode: as a wireless backhaul radio for a mesh environment
	scanner mode
client stations can operate in 2 modes:
	infrastructure mode: connect to an AP
	ad hoc mode
27.CSMA/CD  carrier sense multiple access/collosion detection
	used on 802.3(wired) networks  (full-duplex)
	detect collision, stop transmitting, wait a random amount a time and start again
CSMA/CA  collision avoidance
	used on 802.11(wireless) (half-duplex)
	cannot transmit at the same time, so cannot detect collsions when they occur
	so the device just listens for a random time to see if the network is in use
	every frame sent on an 802.11 network is acknowledged by the receiver with an ACK frame
28.5 major aspects of wireless security
	data protection
	three As, authentication(who?) authorization(what can do?) accounting(auditing, tracking) 
	segmentation: separating user traffic so that security breaches can be confined to specific areas. Usually use firewalls, routers, LANs, etc
	monitoring
	security policy, including responsibilities, threats, potential financial impacts, etc
29.data protection
	wired networks can be divided into internal private network, which is trusted and no encryption required, and external public network, which is not trusted. But wireless network should be treated as untrusted by nature.
	2 most common encryption algorithms used to protect wireless data: RC4 and AES
	RC4 is not as secured as AES
30. monitoring
	WIDS  wireless intrusion detection system
	WIPS  wireless intrusion protection system
31. client authentiaction
	wired world: based on a shared secret, such as password
	wireless world: open authentication(no credentials, join using the ssid), WEP, EAP, WPA
32. WEP wireless equivalence privacy
	deprecated, but still offered as an option to provide compatibility
EAP  a framework for security protocal
WPA and WPA2 support 2 authentication modes:
	personal mode: a pre-shared key with max length of 64 characters is used
	enterprise mode : an 802.1x EAP authentcation method is used to authenticat0e clients
33. 802.1x (IEEE 802.1x security standard for port-based network access control)
involves 3 parts:
	a client desiring access 
	a WAP
	an authentication server(RADIUS/EAP)
34. MAC filtering
	however, MAC address can be easily spoofed	
35.rogue AP
	an insertion of extra, unauthorized hardware in order to bypass the security measures
	preventions: 802.1x should be used to secure all open network ports
	WIDS can identify rogue APs
	physical security
36. soft APs
	a software implementation of a wifi adapter
	could function as a rogue AP, so be sure to adapt approprate secure measures
37. eavesdropping
	casual: normal WLAN discovery. software programs send out null probe request and the APs response with SSID, channel, encryption info, etc
	malicious: the intent determines it legal or illegal
38.DoS attack
	can appear in layer 1, physical layer, as well as layer 2, data link layer.
	layer1: RF jamming attack
	layer2: tampering with 802.11 frames.  alreadily recognized by most WIDS/WIPS systems
39. SNR  signal-to-noise ratio
	measured in dB
	higher dB indicates the signal is stronger than the noise.  25dB or greater is considered a good quality
	nagetive dB indicates the signal is less than the noise
	low SNR will result in layer 2 frame retransmission because the signal cannot be read and ACKs will not be sent
40. hidden node obstruction
	CSMA/CA, when users cannot detect each other but can detect the AP, the scan to avoid collision becomes useless and the retransmission rate increases dramatically
	can be found using a protocol analyzer
